PARQUET-2474: Add FIXED_SIZE_LIST logical type (#241)
apache/parquet-format: LogicalTypes.md

The sort order for `FLOAT16` is signed (with special handling of NANs and signed zeros); it uses the same [logic](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format#sort-order) as `FLOAT` and `DOUBLE`.

> ### FIXED_SIZE_LIST

Reviewer: Interesting choice to annotate a binary primitive field instead of a repeated group field. I see pros and cons with this design:

PROs:
* Guarantees zero-copy, as the layout is defined to be just bytes. In contrast, would this annotate a group, a writer could decide to use a fancy per-value encoding (e.g., dictionary) and thus create a list that first has to be "decoded" before it can be used.
* Guarantees that a list is always contained on one page instead of being split over multiple pages. Again, this helps in keeping decoders easy and guaranteeing zero copy.
* This solves the problem of redundant R-Levels. Since it's just a primitive column, no r-level considerations have to be taken into account.

CONs:
* Cannot create fixed size lists of nested types (e.g., list of structs). I see that this isn't necessary for tensors or embedding vectors, but shouldn't the feature be extensible for other scenarios as well? This limits the composability of the feature. I can now create a struct of fixed size lists, but not a fixed size list of structs.
* Parquet has a concept for (non-fixed size) lists. It is conceptually weird that fixed size lists are totally different from (non-fixed size) lists.

I think the PROs outweigh the CONs here, so I think this is fine with me. I just want everyone to be aware about the ramifications.

Reviewer: cc @tustvold, as you also brought up this point. I agree that having a new property of a repeated group would be more flexible, but it also comes at some cost, as outlined above. Also, it couldn't be just a logical type in this case, as a logical type cannot change the handling of R-Levels.

Author: > * This solves the problem of redundant R-Levels. Since it's just a primitive column, no r-level considerations have to be taken into account.

This is the main reason I'd like to propose this type, see https://github.com/apache/arrow/issues/34510.

> * Cannot create fixed size lists of nested types (e.g., list of structs). I see that this isn't necessary for tensors or embedding vectors, but shouldn't the feature be extensible for other scenarios as well? This limits the composability of the feature. I can now create a struct of fixed size lists, but not a fixed size list of structs.

Lack of composability is a downside, but I think it's still worth the compromise. I've not seen need for fixed_size_list(struct) in tensor computing, but that's probably just because it's not available.

> * Cannot have null elements in fixed size lists. This might not be desired for all lists, but there can be use cases where having null values in them is preferrable.

In tensor computation this is usually addressed with bitmasks, which can be stored as a `fixed_size_list(binary, num_values)`.

> * Parquet has a concept for (non-fixed size) lists. It is conceptually weird that fixed size lists are totally different from (non-fixed size) lists.

Perhaps we should call this type `FixedSizeArray` to disambiguate?

> I'm now feeling that maybe wrapping a `Vector[PrimitiveType, Size]` is also ok, but currently representing this is a bitweird in the model. May I ask would a `Vector` having data below?
> 
> ```
> 1. [1, 1, 1], [null, 1, 1] <-- data with null
> 2. null, [1, 1, 1] <-- null vector
> ```
> 
> And would vector contains a "nested" vector?

I think case 2. is ok, but case 1. should be expressed with a separate null bitmask that's not part of the type.

The `FIXED_SIZE_LIST` annotation represents a fixed-size list of elements

> of a primitive data type. It must annotate a `binary` primitive type.

Reviewer 2: "binary" means either fixed or variable length, right? I always get confused 😅.

Reviewer 3: Could you please provide a concrete example on how the list is structured? What about their definition & repetition levels? Intuitively, I thought not limit it to binary type. For example, it would be possible to support something like int[N] or double[N] and even multi-dimensional list like int[M][N].

Reviewer 2: Perhaps use `byte_array` in this PR (see #251).

Author: Will do, thanks!

Author: > Could you please provide a concrete example on how the list is structured? What about their definition & repetition levels? Intuitively, I thought not limit it to binary type. For example, it would be possible to support something like int[N] or double[N] and even multi-dimensional list like int[M][N].

I would represent the fixed sized list as a non-nested `FIXED_LEN_BYTE_ARRAY` + `type` + `num_values`. Multidimensional lists/arrays bring much more complexity that I'm not sure makes sense to store as a logical type (see [FixedShapeTensor in Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/CanonicalExtensions.html#fixed-shape-tensor)).

> Perhaps use `byte_array` in this PR (see #251).

Done.

> of a primitive data type. It must annotate a `binary` primitive type.

Reviewer: `binary` isn't a defined primitive type in Parquet. Do you mean FIXED_LEN_BYTE_ARRAY?

Author: Yes, thanks! Changed.

> The `fixed_len_byte_array` data is interpreted as a sequence of elements of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `binary` data is interpreted as a sequence of elements of
```

> the same primitive data type.

Reviewer 2: If this is only for primitive types, should the type be added to the `FixedSizedListType` struct?

Author: Added.

The sort order for `FLOAT16` is signed (with special handling of NANs and signed zeros); it uses the same [logic](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format#sort-order) as `FLOAT` and `DOUBLE`.

### FIXED_SIZE_LIST

The `FIXED_SIZE_LIST` annotation represents a fixed-size list of elements

> of a fixed-width data type. It must annotate an N-byte fixed length binary

Reviewer 4: Why couldn't we support variable width data types here? Effectively this type would act like a repeated element, but with the repetition levels not needing to be specified?

Author: My assumption was `fixed_len_byte_array` will give us better performance than `binary` but we then require constant bit width. Are you saying we could relax this condition, use `binary` and cover non-fixed-width types?

Author: I suppose `binary` vs `fixed_len_byte_array` wouldn't affect performance that much. Changed.
I wonder if it would make sense to also propose a non-nested LIST type?

The sort order for `FLOAT16` is signed (with special handling of NANs and signed zeros); it uses the same [logic](https://github.com/apache/parquet-format#sort-order) as `FLOAT` and `DOUBLE`.

### FIXED_SIZE_LIST

The `FIXED_SIZE_LIST` annotation represents a fixed-size list of elements

> of a primitive data type. It must annotate a `FIXED_LEN_BYTE_ARRAY` primitive type.

Reviewer 2: As written, the elements can themselves be arrays. Is this intended? Or should it be "non-array primitive data type"?

Author: I didn't really consider the possibility of elements being arrays and I think non-array limitation makes sense. Changed to:
```markdown
The `FIXED_SIZE_LIST` annotation represents a fixed-size list of elements
of a non-array primitive data type. It must annotate a `FIXED_LEN_BYTE_ARRAY` primitive type.
```

The `FIXED_LEN_BYTE_ARRAY` data is interpreted as a fixed size sequence of

> elements of the same primitive data type.

Author: Yes, that seems like a thing to specify. Changed to:
```markdown
The `FIXED_LEN_BYTE_ARRAY` data is interpreted as a fixed size sequence of
elements of the same primitive data type encoded with plain encoding.
```

The sort order used for `FIXED_SIZE_LIST` is undefined.

> ### VARIABLE_SIZE_LIST

Reviewer 2: Please do separate this out into a separate discussion. I see the utility of the fixed size list, but this one just seems like a special case for a non-nested list.

Author: Done.
